plentiful, and it is more economical than oil or
gas.
What other forms
of fuel are you using besides the water power?
Well, as I stated, coal, and then there's not much
coal in Texas, although the United States has
enough coal in it to take care of all the needs of the
United States, say, for three or four hundred
years. By needs, I mean to make power and for any
other use. But there is a lot of lignite in Texas.
Now, lignite is what you call young coal. It just
hadn't been in the earth long enough to change to
coal. It's... And therefore, it's not as good as
coal from the standpoint of burning because it
hadn't aged as long as coal has. It still has
some... And
it takes... It's not as economical a fuel as coal.
But since it's here in Texas, it's primarily in,
say, from Bastrop towards Texarkana. There's an
area in there, the Aluminum Company of America has
a tremendous lignite plant at Rockdale, and the
Texas Power and Light Company buys power from it
when they're not using it at the plant. Then Texas
Power and Light Company and Texas Utilities,
Dallas Power and Light, are building or have built
a big lignite plant on beyond Rockdale going
towards Texarkana. Now LCRA is trying to build it,
lignite plant near LaGrange or add to their coal
plant but instead of burning coal burn lignite.
It's a little more difficult to burn lignite and
but as I say since you don't have to ship it all the
way from Wyoming it would be more economical and
since people are so dependent on electric power
this day and time for their mode of living why it's
up to the utilities to get them the power at the most
economical rate that they can because otherwise
the people couldn't use it. And so the LCRA at the
present time is considering building a lignite
plant. They are not considering building a
nuclear plant at the present time. And of course
there are no other fuels that are available. They
talk about them in the paper, about burning
garbage and burning, I mean, solar power and wind
power, windmills and things like that, but
they're just sort of things that are way out and And
maybe they'll get some benefit out of it, maybe
solar power after the year 2000 or beyond that, but
not anytime soon. So actually the only thing that
they've got is to either burn oil, burn gas, or burn
coal or burn lignite. And oil is expensive and gas
is expensive and Although now that they're
finding so much gas, there is a movement on to have
Congress repeal the law saying that you can't
build electric generating plants that will burn
gas. And they may do that. If they do, why, they may
go back to burning gas. That's why all the plants in
Texas were burning gas until just recently.
because there was plenty of gas in Texas, and it
was a very economical fuel, it was a very clean
fuel, and you don't have a lot of trash to dispose of
after you burn it. But that is the situation now
insofar as Electric power in the near future, I'd
say in the next 10, 15, 20 years is going to have to
come from coal, lignite, or gas, or nuclear power.
There's just not going to be any other source. You
mentioned that the SRA sells their energy to
cities and townships and stuff like that. Is their
rates comparable to private companies? Well,
their rate was more economical in the early years.
From 1940 to 1965, I'd say 25 years, the people in
Central Texas saved, by virtue of the LCRA rates,
upward of all around $10 million, maybe up to $10
million a year. average so they've served over
saved over a quarter of a billion dollars in the 25
years that on electric rates that that money was
able to stay in central texas and and spent by the
people themselves rather than paid for
electricity now after the uh oil embargo and when
they made them and the price of oil went so high and
then gas went so high. While the rates of LCRA are
comparable to the rates of private utilities but
they are still a little bit lower I understand. I
haven't kept up with it the last seven years.
You mentioned the other authorities that are in
Texas. Is the LCRA the largest one? From the
standpoint of business and income, it is much the
largest because of the electric utility,
electric business. None of the other authorities
have any electric power except the Brazos River
Authority, and they sell their power at the dam.
They don't wholesale it to cities or rural
electric cooperatives like the LCRA. And they
have a little power at Possum Kingdom Dam and then a
little power at Whitney Dam. But it doesn't amount
to too much. And their revenue then comes
primarily from selling water for irrigation and
for municipal uses. And then they've gone in the
sewerage business. of building sewage plants for
cities, small cities that couldn't afford to, the
River Authority has built them and runs it for
them. And that's the same thing with the Trinity
River Authority and others, but from standpoint
of income, that of course is one of the great
changes in the last few years. When I was there, I
think our income went up from about $2 million a
year to about $20 million a year. Well now, it's
well above $100 million and going up much more than
that on account of the price of electricity having
gone up so much. Their power bill runs millions of
dollars a month. That's the basis of the electric
load growing so much. You mentioned that they're
building more and more plants, energy plants, are
they expanding their output to different cities?
Is their area expanding? The geographical area is
not expanding, but the load is growing because the
number of people in the area is expanding. More
people are moving into central Texas, and the
population is growing, and the use of electric
power is growing. So what you have is that they
still serve only the same places they served 20
years ago. But it's like, just for example, the
city of Austin. 20 years ago, probably had 100,000
people, 120,000. Today it has nearly 400,000.
Well, it takes four times as much electricity.
Well, that's the same thing with the LCRA. It is
serving today much more than four times as much
electricity to the same area that it served. So it
has to expand, otherwise the people wouldn't be
able to buy electric power, and they'd have to go
elsewhere to buy it, which they don't want to do, of
course. Is there any... ill feelings or animosity
between the LCRA and private companies? Well,
that's what I mentioned a while ago. There was in
the beginning, because the feeling was that the
LCRA would be going into the business of the
private utilities. But that has died, I think,
completely now in the last 20 or 30 years, well,
since 1950. And it came about, I think, by virtue of
the fact they worked together so closely during
the war. uh and now all of them feel that each of them
needs each other they're all interconnected they
they if one of them loses a power plant while the
other one uh sends the power in until they can get it
fixed and all those kind of things so i don't think
there's any there's just a feeling of working
together the same kind of feeling, though, that
anybody who's in the same business is going to
feel. He's going to feel that his business is
better, but he doesn't want the other one put out of
business because he realizes that they're doing a
good job and that also it's much better that they be
there and doing what they're doing.
How does the LCRA handle flood situations in
Texas? What the LCRA has done and built up is they
have numerous people located on farms and ranches
all above the dams. And they furnish them water
gauges and rain gauges. And whenever it rains more
than an inch, they call the LCRA collect and tell
them how much it has rained. There are about, oh, I
think 50 or more of those, probably more than that,
rain gauges scattered all the way from Burn It
Clear out in West Texas on various farms and
ranches. And then when the water gets to the creeks
and then into a river, while we have people
stationed that live there that go down and measure
the river. and say how much the river has risen, how
many feet. And then the LCRA has measured that so
they know that if the San Salvador River at a
certain place has risen 10 feet and is now 15 feet
high, they know how much water that is and how much
water it will put in the lake, let's say Lake
Buckhannon, because that's where the San
Salvador River comes into, if it runs for 24 hours.
And so what they have are rain gauge people that
call in and tell them when they're raining. And if
it rains more than an inch, they call in on the first
inch, and then every time it rains as much as
another inch, they call in. Now when it rains 10 or
12 inches, which causes the floods, a lot of times
they can't call in on account of the rain, and we
don't hear from them until after the rain is over.
But by then we know that there's a big rain. Now,
that was before the day of radar. Now you have radar
that scans the country, and the weathermen advise
the LCRA, but we still have the rain gauges out on
the farms, and they call in and say how much rain
they have, whether the creeks are running, and
then the people on the rivers, the San Salvador
River, the Brady Creek, the Pecan Bow, the Concho
Rivers, and the Llano Rivers, and the Pertinellas
River, They all call in and say how much water is
coming down. And when you're seeing some of those
places, it takes the water two to three days to get
to the lakes. Just like when you release it here in
Austin, it takes five days for it to go all the way
down to the coast. So we have to figure out the days.
We know how much water is coming. We know how much
water we can hold in the lakes. And if necessary, we
start releasing water, but try not to release any
more than the river below us can hold, keeping in
mind it's going to take five days for it to get to the
coast. So it's what it is. It's based on plans and
figures and calculations that have been made as to
how much water is coming in and how much water you
can let out without flooding people.
How exactly is the transition made from LCRA
electricity to actual home electricity? Well,
what the LCRA does is it sells the electricity
wholesale, except it does sell retail in
Kerrville, San Marcos, and San Salvo because
those towns voted that it wanted the LCRA to run
their system. But the LCRA sells wholesale to a
town, say, Brenham, and Brenham, the city buys it,
and the city owns all the electric lines in the
city. And they then take, they have their own
electric system, they're people working for
them, and they take the power at the substation and
deliver it. It's delivered over their lines to the
towns, I mean the cities, the stores, the filling
stations, the schools, and they collect and they
use that money to help run the city. and build
swimming pools and parks and other things. And the
LCRA sells to rural cooperatives and they take the
power to the farms and the ranches and they collect
for it and pay off their debts that they borrowed
their money from the Rural Electric
Administration in Washington and they're paying
off their debts and pay their expenses of their
employees. So what the LCRA does is generate the
electricity and takes it to these cities, 29 of
them, like Georgetown, San Salvador, Kerrville,
and Burnett, and Llano, and all the others, and the
rural electric cooperatives like the Blue Bonnet
Co-op, the co-op down at Fayetteville, Fayette
County Co-op and San Bernard Co-op and all of them,
it takes it to them at their substation. Then they
deliver it out to the people and collect for
it. And each one of them fixes its own retail rate.
So while the LCRA charges all of them the same for
the electricity that's delivered to them, so much
a kilowatt and so much a kilowatt hour, The city or
the cooperative can charge a different rate if it
wants to, if it has to. It depends on what the
problems are in delivering it. So some of the rates
may be different in the cities and the co-ops than
in others, but that's because of their own
problems. But the LCRA sells them all at the same
price.